Joseph Lyons
Professor [Name Withheld]
ENG-W 131
18 December 2015

                  More Than Metal: A Brotherhood of Acceptance

    From the instant an infant is brought into existence and awareness, leaving
the solitude of the womb and entering into the world of others, he or she will
undoubtedly be pampered and nurtured by a loving mother and father.  Due to the
highly concentrated forms of affection we receive during this time, innately, we
begin to lust for interpersonal interaction, as it is repeatedly pressed and
programmed into our subconscious.  As we begin to age from infants to toddlers
to youths, we start to seek out ways that allow us to satiate this need for
interaction, often in the form of joining into communities, as we leave the
grips of our loved ones and venture out into the world (Baumeister 499).  For a
vast majority of individuals, access into any number of typical communities
might be fairly simple and painless, as often they are born into them.  The
child born of Christian parents is likely to be permitted entrance into the
Christian community.  He or she is introduced into the community at an early
age, is accepted by its members, and begins to establish a sense of worth based
on the collective and defining global characteristics the group imparts on its
attendees.  The same applies to the child born of an automobile mechanic; he or
she is able to easily assimilate into the community of automobile enthusiasts,
as they were brought into the community immediately after their birth.  What
becomes of those who are not granted entrance into such typical communities?
What becomes of the outcasts who do not meet the specifications required to join
into a quintessential community?  They will undoubtedly seek out uncommon
communities that lie outside the classifications of “typical” and “normal,” such
as the extreme metal music community, that reflect their personal moral codes
and also further their own self-validation, in order to satiate this lust for
interaction.  In “Community, Commitment, and Individuality,” Robert Bellah et
al. labels the language that one uses to describe the role of existing in
communities of shared virtues and morals in order to define one’s own existence
as the “second language of individualism,” which is also referred to as
community-based individualism.  Bellah defines one of the characteristics of the
second language as “[a] sense of self [that] is rooted in virtues that define a
worthwhile life [which] have been passed on and modeled by others who have
shared traditions” (71).  Bellah states that using the second language involves
individuals who belong to a community that all collectively possess the same
ideals and follow the same traditions.  In a deeper sense, those who engage in
the second language are individuals in a community who have a deep respect of
philanthropy, who have a heavy concern for egalitarianism, and want to focus
their efforts around the centralized theme of humanitarianism.  They merely wish
to promote the group’s well-being, which in turn helps to promote their own
sense of self-worth and define who they are.  The second language of
individualism is not only highly prevalent in most typical communities, but it
is also clearly abundant in atypical groups, such as the community of fans of
extreme metal music.  Humans innately yearn for interpersonal interaction in
order to validate their own sense of worth as individuals.  However, not all
individuals are granted, or even permitted, entrance into typical societal
communities that most others enter easily, as often they are ostracized, cast
out, or even exiled from them entirely.  Subsequently, individuals will often
traverse great lengths in order to join uncommon communities based on similar
interests, in order to utilize the second language of individualism and obtain
this fundamental interaction that is vital and essential to human existence.

    In order to understand why individuals find it necessary to travel such great
lengths to join uncommon communities, such as the extreme metal music community,
we must first understand the psychological desire for human interaction and how
existing in a community of shared virtues can satiate that need.  As individuals
begin to develop throughout their lives, they will begin to establish a sense of
self-worth based on the collection of characteristics and attributes that the
individual possesses.  A student who graduates from a prestigious Ivy League
university with a perfect 4.0-grade point average is labeled as both extremely
intelligent and diligent, which subsequently allows the individual to form a
sense of self-worth, as he or she feels as if they have accomplished a grand
task in life.  While having a firmly rooted sense of self-worth is vital in
one’s life, the major issue with it is that it does not fulfill the vacancy that
exists in the minds and hearts of those who wish to make deeper and more
profound impacts outside the constructs of their personal life.  A sense of
worth that is deeply rooted in community is needed.  The craving of human
interaction merely helps to contribute to the motivation of joining a community
to make an impact on society.  Dean Barnlund, social commentator and author of
“Communication in a Global Village,” elaborates on the concept that humans have
a basic need to engage in interpersonal interaction when he says “[i]t would
seem that everywhere people would desire to break out of the boundaries of their
own experiential worlds[, but t]heir ability to react sensitively to a wider
range of events and people requires an overcoming of […] cultural parochialism”
(60).  Barnlund states that individuals require more in life than what exists in
the confines of their own minds.  He further adds that in order for people to
effectively and appropriately interact with one another, they must allow
themselves to accept change, to appreciate cultural difference, and to not be
hindered by closed-mindedness.  Jennifer Cobb, another social commentator and
author of “Cybergrace: the Search for God in the Digital World,” both furthers
and adds to the idea that humans innately crave human interaction when she
states “it can be argued that it is a fundamental human need to leave our daily
reality and be transported to other states of consciousness […] These journeys
are transformative in nature.  When we come back, we are changed” (161-162).
While Barnlund states that he believes that all people innately lust for
interaction, he omits the key component that Cobb identifies; humans crave
interaction with others because the experience has a direct effect on their
personal lives.  Individuals who participate in a community to promote finding a
clean energy source do so because they care about the positive effect it will
have on the earth, but also because the act of aiding transforms their
perception of who they are, directly affecting their self-worth.  The lust for
human interaction is instilled in us at the moment of birth, but the desire to
increase the perception of our self-worth is born the moment our actions as
independent individuals fail to provide us with an adequate sense of communal
worth; joining into a community, typical or uncommon, becomes the key component
in solving both of these mental dilemmas.

    As members of society near the precipice of adulthood, transcending the
boundaries of childhood and emerging into the realm of independency, most have
already previously entered into a specific community and have grown accustomed
to the feeling of unity and oneness.  Yet, there exists those who never truly
identify with or enter into any of the quintessential communities that others so
easily permeate into.  Whether the isolated individuals possess morals that do
not align with those of typical communities, causing them to be denied and
ostracized from them entirely, or those group’s global beliefs severely turn the
individual away from the idea of joining, in any case, the resulting path is a
desolate one that leaves much to be desired. This extreme social isolation can
often result in severe mental trauma in those who have been denied access into
typical communities for a great portion of their lives.  Roy Baumeister, a
professor of social psychology at Florida State University and author of “The
Need to Belong: Desire for Interpersonal Attachments as a Fundamental Human
Motivation,” labeled the innate social seeking property of humans as the
“Belongingness Hypothesis” and described the negative affects that can result in
the minds of those who do not satiate their desire to belong:

    [T]he belongingness hypothesis [states] that human beings have a pervasive
    drive to form and maintain at least a minimum quantity of lasting, positive,
    and significant interpersonal relationships […] Deprivation of stable, good
    relationships [in communities] has been linked to a large array of aversive
    and pathological consequences.  People who lack belongingness suffer higher
    levels of mental and physical illness and are relatively highly prone to a
    broad range of behavioral problems, ranging from traffic accidents to
    criminality to suicide. (Baumeister 497, 511)

Baumeister illuminates all negative repercussions that can result from living a
life filled entirely with isolation and void of belongingness.  Individuals who
have been cast out of typical communities inevitably accumulate high degrees of
psychological damage, which then manifests into a physical form of illness. This
form of illness can be so detrimental that it can physically cause an individual
to be sick, to misplace their concentration while traveling by automobile,
resulting in accidents, to commit acts of crime, or even to contemplate
committing suicide in order to relieve themselves of the mental anguish.  More
often than not, those who are feeling the dizzying effects from the deprivation
of belonging will subsequently gain the motivation to strive to find less strict
communities that accept all individuals and are free of the prejudice and bias
that existed in the typical ones who denied them.  One can easily infer that
extreme and aggressive metal music can ultimately become an outlet for the
pent-up anguish, sadness, and psychological frustration that accumulates in
individuals over the years spent in isolation due to the feeling of societal
betrayal; the metal community also offers them a sense of security by allowing
them to exist alongside trusted members who vow to never cast judgment upon
them.  In order to fully comprehend the degree of acceptance and the metal
community offers those who have been denied a sense of belonging in the world,
we must experience it through the eyes of an individual who underwent such
isolation.  Nelson Varas Díaz, another social psychology professor at the
University of Puerto Rico, an extreme metal enthusiast, and a metal activist,
fully understands the path of social neglect that allowed him to find his way
into the community of extreme metal fans, subsequently fulfilling his sense of
belonging.  In an interview, Díaz elaborates on his personal entrance into the
community when he states, “I think that, like most of the people I have met that
enjoy metal music, social alienation was an important part of getting into this
style of music.  I will be the first to recognize that as a young man I felt
very much isolated from traditional institutions” (Stevens).  Díaz believes that
his entrance into the metal community was directly correlated with both his
“alienation” from normal social experiences in his childhood and with the lack
of belongingness that ensued from leading an isolated life.  One can almost
infer that he believes that fate united him with a community that would accept
him for who he was, when all others stranded him in his own cell of solitude.
Díaz further elaborates on how accepting the group was of him when he states,
“[b]eing part of a metal community in Puerto Rico, in the late 80s and early 90s
was exciting, and I felt that I could be myself there” (Stevens).  Díaz does not
have to alter his self or image in order to fit in amongst his peers, as others
might have had to do in more strict and traditional communities; he does not
feel the need to cower behind the construction of a false facade.  Díaz’ case
provides us the crucial evidence that properly illuminates the true dynamics of
the metal community.   His case allows us to understand that the metal community
does not actually cater to the stereotype that only “anti-mainstream,
anger-filled youths” are allowed to join, but that the community actually has no
constraints or restrictions on who is and who is not eligible.  Díaz’ case
proves that even those with highly respectable and professional careers can find
themselves at ease amongst the non-judgmental peers in the community.  The
extreme metal community not only becomes a domain that fulfills the sense of
belonging, but it becomes a domain of solace and mental relief for all of those
who have ever struggled to fit in, watching helplessly as others seemingly
obtain access into communities with ease, while traveling down an isolated path
of solitude throughout their life.

    Due to their desire to utilize the second language of individualism, the
union of members of the metal community often is the result of a much deeper
passion to support philanthropic movements, or causes, that help other
communities that are in need.  This is due to the high level of emotional
connectivity the members have with one another; members of the metal community
are united by a feeling of oneness.  To the individual who does not enjoy heavy
metal or understand the true dynamics of the group, the community may seem like
a clan of chaotic barbarians who exhibit no respect for one another, but this
one-dimensionally skewed assumption could not be further from the truth.  The
members of the metal community seem to exhibit all of the traits that make up
what author Steven Rosell refers to as “social cohesion.”  Rosell, a social
commentator and author of “Changing Maps: Governing in a World of Rapid Change,”
defines social cohesion by the following traits: “[s]hared values […], reducing
disparities in wealth […], facing shared challenges, and [being] members of the
same community” (78).  The “shared values” characteristic in a cohesive
community is quite obvious in that it refers to members all possessing similar
virtues and outlooks on life.  “Reducing disparities in wealth” refers to
members of a cohesive community financially helping one another in desperate
times of need.  Those who have larger sums of financial assets choose to share
them with those who have little.  Lastly, “facing shared challenges” is also
quite obvious, as it refers to members of a cohesive community collectively
sharing the burdens of difficult times and situations.  It also refers to
members using other members of the community as a support system.  This social
cohesion amongst members is easily observable when viewing the resulting actions
committed by metal fans during the earthquakes of Nepal.  In early 2015, a
series of massive earthquakes, occurring over a several month span, shook and
devastated the small nation of Nepal, causing the death of thousands of its
citizens.  Outside of the massive death toll, the destruction caused by the
earthquakes left thousands of native residents homeless and severely injured,
both mentally and physically.  Relief was heavily needed in order to mitigate
the costs of funerals, repairs, and to aid in the temporary relocation of
citizens left without homes; many world-wide non-profit charity organizations,
such as the Red Cross and the Salvation Army, all offered their services.  While
these large organizations were doing their part to help provide support in the
wake of devastation, smaller uncommon communities were also doing their best to
contribute.  A relief effort labeled “Metal for Nepal” was created by the
Nepalese metal community to help during this difficult time.  The effort called
upon all the metal bands of Nepal to put on large-scale shows in order to
generate funds to donate.  Fans coming to the shows understood that their cover
charges would be donated to the cause and members of bands playing understood
that they would be essentially playing for free, willingly giving away their
earnings for the betterment of the community.  For some bands, the decision to
donate their earnings has been one that has taken no contemplation whatsoever,
as some band’s members are directly related to victims of this disaster.  Metal
for Nepal has been entirely successful, migrating out of Nepal and across the
globe and into other countries, such as the United States, where bands are also
donating their earnings.  Internet-based metal record labels are even promoting
and selling compilation albums to further add to the benefit.  Kim Kelly,
journalist and author of “Metal for Nepal: How the Heavy Metal Community is
Lending a Helping Hand to Earthquake Survivors” further adds to the hospitality
of this community when she states, “[t]he metal community supports its own;
countless bands and fans have thrown benefit shows, auctions, and other
charitable endeavors to help brothers or sisters in need, and that tight-knit
tribal instinct is part of what makes metal so great” (Kelly).  It is from these
actions that we can easily conclude that the members of the extreme metal
community belong to a socially cohesive society.  The Nepalese metal bands all
share the same passion to help the community in need, which aligns with the
“shared values” characteristic of social cohesion.  The Nepalese bands are
willing to relinquish and donate their concert earnings to victims in order to
help pay for damages, which represents “reducing disparities in wealth,” as
money flows from those who are financially stable, to those who are not.  The
last vital characteristic of social cohesion is “facing shared challenges,”
which is extremely prevalent in the Nepalese metal community’s actions.  Lastly,
being part of a socially cohesive society allows the members of the metal
community to utilize the second language of individualism.  Members participate
in philanthropic acts of kindness not only to further benefit their surrounding
communities, but because doing so gives them relief in the form of
self-validation, as their selfless actions heighten their personal sense of
self-worth.

    As humans increasingly become aware of the need to utilize in the second
language of individualism, working with a desired community to further a
specific philanthropic cause while simultaneously satiating the lust for social
interaction, a much more obvious and distinct truth is  unveiled, hidden almost
in plain sight: human sustainability and evolution is highly dependent on the
inspiration we both receive and submit to those who surround us in our various
communities.  Very rarely are we able to witness forward-thinking innovation,
spurting forth from the minds of individuals who have forced themselves into
social deprivation and solitude, as those who possess all the knowledge and
experience required for such revolutionary tasks are extremely far from common.
More often than not, we witness and experience the birth of life-changing events
hailing from the collective conscious of unified people.   We attribute our
success rates in the medical world to the highly passionate and dedicated
researchers in medicinal development communities that find cures for our
life-threatening ailments.  We attribute the ability to transport our minds to
polar ends of the global village to the passionate developers of technology in
the communities of computer specialists.  The betterment of mankind is not
entirely feasible without the inspiration obtained from our surrounding peers in
our specific communities.  We need others to “feed” off of, and more
importantly, to push us past our self-constructed boundaries we feel are
impossible to break.  In the grand scheme of life, we are ultimately drawn
towards one another because our collective existence necessitates social
collaboration in order to solve life’s greatest challenges and mysteries,
without it, we run the ultimate risk of becoming obsolete in the unforgiving
progression of time.

                                  Works Cited

Barnlund, Dean. “Communication in a Global Village.” Brunk et al. 47-61.

Baumeister, Roy F., and Mark R. Leary. "The Need to Belong: Desire for
    Interpersonal Attachments as a Fundamental Human Motivation." Psychological
    Bulletin 117.3 (1995): 497. Business Source Premier. Web. 10 Dec. 2015.

Bellah, Robert et al. “Community, Commitment, and Individuality.” Brunk et al.
    65-74.

Brunk, Terence, et al., eds. Literacies: Reading, Writing, Interpretation. 2nd
    ed. New York: Norton, 2000. Print.

Cobb, Jennifer. “Cybergrace: The Search for God in the Digital World.” Brunk et
    al. 155-166.

Kelly, Kim. “Metal for Nepal: How the Heavy Metal Community is Lending a Helping
    Hand to Earthquake Survivors.” Vice. Vice, 16 June 2015. Web. 1 Dec 2015.

Rosell, Steven A. Changing Maps: Governing in a World of Rapid Change. Ottawa:
    Carleton UP and Meridian International Institute and the Parliamentary
    Centre, 1995. Print.

Stevens, Brett. "Interview: Nelson Varas Díaz." Death Metal Underground.
    Deathmetal.org, 12 Oct. 2013. Web. 1 Dec. 2015.
