   A Direct Comparison of Fermentation Rates of Glucose and Maltose by Yeast
                           (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)

                                  Joseph Lyons
                                 March 20, 2019

Abstract

The fermentation process plays a vital role within anaerobic cellular
respiration, a process that is used to generate Adenosine Triphosphate, or the
primary energy source for cell processes, in the absence of oxygen.  Plant and
fungi cells specifically undergo alcoholic fermentation, which produces carbon
dioxide and ethanol as waste products.  The primary ingredient of cellular
respiration is a monosaccharide of some sort, such as glucose.  The alcoholic
fermentation process, and its associated waste products, are essential elements
within the food and wine industry, as bakers and vintners (winemakers) heavily
depend on them to create their products.  It is then in the best interest of
these industries, and also the best interest of these cells, to find the
saccharide that ferments the most.  We conducted an experiment that allowed us
to directly test the fermentation rates of a monosaccharide, glucose, and a
disaccharide, maltose, in order to see which would ferment more.  Both
saccharides were subjected to the same amount of yeast suspension, Saccharomyces
Cerevisiae, and to the same conditions of incubation.  The result was that
glucose produced 14.6 mm of CO2 / hour, while maltose produced 3.9 mm CO2 /
hour. 

Introduction

    Fermentation is a process that is coupled with another process, glycolysis,
to bring the functionality of producing energy to cells in the absence of
oxygen.  This oxygen-less production of energy is referred to as anaerobic
respiration and takes on two forms: lactic fermentation and alcoholic
fermentation.  Animal cells and bacteria undergo the anaerobic cell respiration
that uses lactic fermentation while plants and some fungi undergo the anaerobic
cell respiration that uses alcoholic fermentation; our focus will be on the
latter of the two.  Both forms of anaerobic cell respiration rely on the same
first step, glycolysis (Grens et al., 2008).

    It is during glycolysis that the six-carbon monosaccharides are broken down
into two three-carbon molecules called pyruvates, through the help of some
worker Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP) molecules, which are consumed.  The breaking
of the covalent bonds in the six-carbon monosaccharides ultimately generates
energy that drives the creation of more ATP than was initially consumed and
converts low-energy NAD+ molecules into higher-energy NADH molecules.  The
creation of ATP is of extreme importance to any cell, as it is the primary
energy fuel supply which aids in the powering of many underlying cell processes
and chemical reactions needed to sustain life.  Glycolysis inputs and outputs
are captured in the unbalanced equation below:

          C6H12O6 + 2NAD+ + 2ATP → 2 Pyruvates (C3H4O3) + 2NADH + 4ATP
                              (Grens et al., 2008)

The alcoholic fermentation step involves converting these newly built NADH
molecules back into their lower-energy NAD+ forms.  These resulting low-energy
NAD+ molecules are fed back into the glycolysis step.  As the name suggests,
alcohol (ethanol) is a product of the alcoholic fermentation process, along with
CO2, and the aforementioned NAD+. The alcoholic fermentation inputs and outputs
are captured in the unbalanced equation below:

                 2 Pyruvate + 2NADH → 2 Ethanol + 2CO2 + 2NAD+
                              (Grens et al., 2008)

    In a symbiotic operation between humans and fungi, the alcoholic
fermentation process can be used to facilitate the production of certain goods
within the food and wine industry.  One of the main products of alcoholic
fermentation, CO2, is used during the baking of bread.  Yeast, typically S.
cerevisiae, is added into the bread dough prior to baking.  As the yeast
ferments the starch (composed of glucose monomers) within the bread, the
resulting CO2 escapes through the bread, causing it to rise and take form
(Karki et al., 2017).  Winemakers also depend on the alcoholic fermentation of
certain saccharides by specific yeasts in order to yield the ethanol that is
present in alcoholic beverages (Okunowo et al., 2005).  It is in the best
interest of each of these parties, the bakers, the winemakers, and even the
yeast specimens, to find the most preferred saccharide of a particular yeast in
order to obtain the largest yield possible of CO2, ethanol, and NAD+ (to be used
to generate ATP in glycolysis).

    The specific question we wish to answer is whether glucose (a
monosaccharide) or maltose (a disaccharide) ferments by yeast more quickly.  We
are utilizing the yeast specimen S. cerevisiae in our test, which undergoes
anaerobic respiration in the absence of oxygen.  CO2 is one of the main waste
products of the alcoholic fermentation process; as such, this gas can be used as
a metric to allow us to compare the fermentation rates of each saccharide and
conclude which one ferments faster by S. cerevisiae.  We hypothesize that S.
cerevisiae will ferment maltose more quickly than glucose.  We predicted that if
we used identical resources on each of the solutions and that if the only
difference between each solution was whether one contained glucose or one
contained maltose, that maltose would produce a more prodigious amount of CO2,
indicating it was fermenting faster.

Materials and Methods

    Two solutions were prepared.  The first 25 mL test tube received 8 mL of
yeast suspension and 8 mL of 10% glucose solution.  The second 25 mL test tube
received 8mL of yeast suspension and 4 mL of 10% maltose solution.  The
remaining space in both test tubes was then filled with distilled water.  Each
test tube was covered by a larger test tube and carefully inverted as to trap
the glucose and maltose solutions in the smaller inner test tubes.  Any gases
which might have unintentionally been trapped in the test tubes were measured.
Both solutions were placed in a 47°C water bath to incubate for a period of 1
hour, 1 minute, and 30 seconds, in order to expedite the alcoholic fermentation
process.  After the incubation period, both of the gas pockets for each test
tube were again measured and the differences in the initial gas bubble and the
gas bubble present after the incubation period were calculated.  These gas
bubble values that were recorded are crucial, as the main products of the
alcoholic fermentation process are ethanol and carbon dioxide.  The amount of
carbon dioxide produced during the incubation period was then used to determine
which solution fermented faster (Grens, et al., 2008).

    In this experiment, the independent variables were the differing solutions
in each test tube: the glucose solution and maltose solution.  The dependent
variable was the amount of carbon dioxide produced during the alcoholic
fermentation process.  The main controlled factor of the experiment was using
one half of the amount of maltose solution (4 mL) as glucose solution (8 mL), to
compensate for the fact glucose is a monosaccharide and maltose is a
disaccharide.  Other controlled factors included using the same culture of yeast
in each tube, using distilled water from the same bottle in both solutions,
using the same volume of solution in each test tube during the fermentation
process, and incubating both solutions at the same temperature for the same
duration of time.

Results

	In the experiment testing whether glucose or maltose had greater CO2
production rates when being fermented by yeast, it is evident that the CO2
production rate of the glucose solution (14.6 mm CO2 / hour) was substantially
higher than the CO2 production rate of the maltose solution (3.9 mm CO2 / hour),
as presented in Figure 1.  The production rate of CO2 for the glucose solution
was nearly four times greater than the production rate of CO2 for the maltose
solution.

Figure 1. A Direct Comparison of Fermentation Rates of Glucose and Maltose by
Yeast.  Two solutions, glucose and maltose, were fermented by yeast, and the
production rates of CO2 were calculated for each solution.

Discussion

	The results of this experiment did not reinforce our initial hypothesis;
maltose did not ferment more quickly than glucose.  As stated previously,
glucose created nearly four times the amount of CO2 as maltose did during the
fermentation process, despite both solutions being subjected to the same amount
of yeast suspension and the same incubation conditions.  The data reveals that
there must exist other factors that are affecting the rate of fermentation of
these two saccharides.

	It is known that fermentation occurs within the cell, specifically, the
cytoplasm.  In order to reach this region inside the cell, any saccharide must
be transported across the cell membrane via a permease, or a helper transport
protein that is embedded in the phospholipid bilayer; Mal61 is the permease
associated with maltose transportation.  Strangely enough, Mal61 can begin to
lose its transportation ability, as maltose effectively begins to corrupt it;
this is known as the inactivation of Mal61 by maltose and results in a reduction
of the cell’s maltose uptake rate (Rigamonte et al., 2011).  This fact alone
helps to explain why maltose ferments slower than glucose, but another obstacle
lies in the path to fermentation for disaccharides.  If a saccharide that is
being transported across the cell membrane happens to be a disaccharide, it must
be broken down into two separate monosaccharide molecules, through hydrolysis,
directly after transport.  This indicates that a disaccharide requires more work
after being transported, while monosaccharides are transported and then allowed
to instantly begin the first step of anaerobic cellular respiration, glycolysis.
In the case of maltose, the specific enzyme that is required for the hydrolysis
reaction is maltase (Goffrini et al., 2002).  These two facts alone reveal why
there is such a dramatic difference in the fermentation rates of these two
solutions, as shown in Figure 1. It should be mentioned that it is possible that
the design of our experiment was flawed, which could have had a definite impact
on our final results.  The only questionable design choice in our experiment
appears to be the choice we made to use a half as much of the maltose solution
as the glucose solution.  When designing the experiment, we assumed that since a
maltose molecule contains two glucose molecules, that in order to have a fair
experiment, we would need to compensate by using half as much maltose.  Our
understanding of this could be flawed in that maybe the 10% mixtures of each
saccharide already accounted for this fact.  If that is the case, then we should
have used 8 mL of solution for each test.  However, Figure 1 seems to show that
even with equal portions, glucose might have still fermented at a faster rate
than maltose, maybe only twice as quickly; this statement is made under the
assumption that their fermentation rates are linearly related to the amount of
saccharide solution used.  A separate test using equal portions of solutions may
be justified.
 
Literature Cited

Goffrini, P. Ferrero, I. and Donnini, C. (2002) Respiration-dependent
    utilization of sugars in yeasts: A determinant role for sugar transporters.
    Journal of Bacteriology 184:427-432.

Grens, A., McLister, J., Schnabel, A., Marr, D. (2008) Laboratory manual for
    introduction to biological sciences L102: diversity, structure, and function
    of cells, plants, and animals.  Department of Biological Science, Indiana
    University South Bend, South Bend.

Karki, T. Timilsina, P. Yadav A. Pandey, G. Joshi, Y. Bhujel, S. Adhikari, R.
    and Neupane, K. (2017) Selection and characterization of potential baker’s
    yeast from indigenous resources of Nepal. Biotechnology Research
    International.

Okunowo, W. Okotore, and R. Osuntoki, A. (2005) The alcoholic fermentation
    efficiency of indigenous yeast strains on different origin on orange juice.
    African Journal of Biotechnology 4:1290-1296.

Rigamonte, T. Silveira, W. Fietto Luciano. Castro, I. Breunig, K. and Passos, F.
    (2011) Restricted sugar update by sugar-induced internalization of the years
    lactose/galactose permease Lac12. FEMS Yeast Research 11:243-251.
