Joseph Lyons
Professor [Name Withheld]
CSCI-C 490
18 October 2017

                               Analysis of Pooyan

1. Game Facts and Storyline

    The Japanese word "pooyan" roughly translates to "little piglets" in
English.  Pooyan is a simple game, that was created in 1982 under Stern
Electronics and licensed by Konami, that bases its narrative loosely around the
characters in The Three Little Pigs.  It was originally designed to be an arcade
game exclusively for Chuck E. Cheese locations, but later made its way into the
consumer's home via the Commodore 64.  The game's main character is Mama Pig,
who is valiantly trying to rescue her piglets from wolves that captured them. On
her journey, Mama Pig encounters swarms of opposition, as packs of wolves
attempt to keep her from rescuing her piglets.  Each round is a fight between
her and a select amount of wolves; winning a round allows Mama Pig to progress
to a more challenging battle (with an increase in the amount of wolves), with
each win bringing her closer and closer to rescuing her family (Pooyan).
Although there is a storyline dealing with Mama Pig trying to retrieve her
piglets, the game is actually infinitely long; the player never actually sees
the end of the game, they merely continuously fight off wolves and try to beat
previous high scores.  After gameplay, we are left to make the assumption that
she eventually finds her piglets and rescues them.

2. Operational Rules and Gameplay

    The game is fairly simple.  Mama bear sits in a basket that is hoisted
vertically up and down by some other pigs, presumably other members of her
family, or friends of hers that share the same interest in rescuing the piglets.
She sits on the right side of the screen facing left towards a massive tree
(figure 1).  The wolves attempt to attack Mama Pig in one of two fashions.  The
first way they attempt to attack her is by using balloons to float down from the
tree towards the ground, so that they can access the ladder that leads to her
basket.  The other way in which they attempt to hurt her is by riding the
balloons up to the top of the tree, where they attempt to push a boulder off a
branch and onto her.  If either scenario is achieved, Mama will lose one of her
three lives.  When it comes to weaponry, she is given a bow and infinitely many
arrows.  She must shoot multiple arrows into each balloon that a wolf is holding
on to, an action that subsequently causes them to fall to their death.  Each
popped balloon and wolf death results in points, which is used to measure the
player's skillset, since the game is infinitely long.  At times, the wolves will
attempt to hit you with apples.  If multiple apples successfully hit mama, she
will fall out of the basket and lose a life, but even if they miss, they can
still in interfere with your ability to shoot the wolves, as they absorb the
impact of the arrow.  The difficulty lies in the fact that the wolves are moving
up or down, and you, as the player, must attempt to predict where an arrow
should be launched, and move mama there, an procedure that requires tuned motor
responses.  To lessen the difficulty of the game, a player may also choose a
more informal strategy of simply continuously shooting arrows and hoping for one
to hit.  (Intermittently, a special type of projectile is presented to Mama Pig:
a slab of meat.  Why the slab of meat was chosen as a special projectile by the
developers seems to be unknown, but it presents some sort of comic relief for
the player.  A slab-of-meat projectile harnesses the power to cut through the
strings of multiple balloons, allowing for you to clear many enemies off of the
battlefield with a single action.

                       Figure 1: Pooyan Gameplay (Pooyan)

3. Technical Details and Design

    The design of Pooyan is extremely simple, although one firmly believe that
this is less of a design choice and more of a byproduct of the era in which it
was developed in.  The game is entirely two-dimensional.  Each round uses the
exact same scene: a blue backdrop, a large tree on the left, and a ladder
leading up to the pigs hoisting Mama Pig on the right side of the screen.  It
becomes obvious that most of what makes up the game is simply these decorative
pieces. These pieces are not active during the game and no interaction occurs
with them. The wolves may appear to be standing on top of the tree or appear to
be climbing the ladder, but one believes that these are not interactions with
these objects directly, but simply rules that govern how certain battlefield
coordinates can be interacted with.  Only Mama, the pigs up top, the wolves, and
the arrows seem to be active objects, or objects that are used in gameplay.  The
game is based on both reactive and continuous animation.  Both Mama Pig's
vertical movements, and the movement from the pigs assisting her, are all based
on the user's input (reaction-based).  Even though the amount of wolf deaths
needed to complete the current round increases, they still seem to spawn based
off of the user and how many the user has slain.  Continuous animation occurs
when the wolves ascend and descend on their own, without user input.  If the
user stops playing entirely, the wolves will advance towards Mama Pig and hurt
her.

    It seems logical that Pooyan makes use of an implicit world type.  Although
based entirely on speculation, it seems that the positions of the wolves on the
battlefield are randomly selected, which would allow one to believe that
collisions between the arrows and the balloons have to be tested, in an event
loop, in order to continue with the "death procedure."  As stated before,
although the wolves appear to be standing on the ground or in the tree, they are
simply given battlefield coordinates that they can move on, giving the
appearance of interaction with the tree or ground.  In an implicit world type,
the environment essentially has no knowledge of the objects in it; this best
describes Pooyan, the environment is merely a decorative piece with game objects
placed on in front of it.


4. Symbolism and Deeper Meaning

    The driving themes that the developers are pushing in this virtual tale are
"love conquers all" and that family is one of the most important aspects of any
person's life.  As children, when we are read the story of The Three Little
Pigs, we realize that in the world of fairy tales, the wolf is the pig's most
dangerous enemy, one that they must constantly evade (The Three Little Pigs).
In Pooyan, the mother pig loses her three piglets and is now facing this enemy
in order to save them.  Taking into considering the previous knowledge we
possess from The Three Little Pigs, it is understood that she is deliberately
choosing to fight her most heinous enemy and letting go of her personal fears.
We engage in cognitive interaction throughout the gameplay as we become
emotionally invested in helping this character find her children.  A second bit
of symbolism can also be found when playing the game, which is the importance of
working in a team, or "strength in numbers."  We know that Mama Pig is able to
fight the wolves because she is getting help from the other pigs who are raising
and lowering her basket.  If she did not have their help, she would probably not
be able to be on this journey.  As players of the game, we are to understand
that there are times when we must accomplish tasks and goals with the help of
others; not every task is realistically achievable alone.  Based on the
symbolism embedded into Pooyan, it is evident that the game reinforces positive
values for players of all ages.

5. Conclusion

    According to IGN, a good game has a storyline that is both enjoyable and
cohesive with the gameplay and is able to immerse the player in the fantasy
world it represents (Martin).  In one's opinion, Pooyan seems to possess these
characteristics.  When comparing it to other games that were massive commercial
hits, such as Pacman, Pooyan had the upper hand in that its developers gave it a
backstory that allowed its players to become emotionally connected to the main
character and her quest.  This emotional connection lends us motivation to try
to conquer our previous high scores, as we empathize with Mama Pig and her
kidnapped piglets.  Having a deep character connection allows us to quickly find
ourselves easily immersed into the game.  In the modern gaming world, Pooyan may
be laughed at for its simplicity and lack of dynamic gameplay.  It also may have
never been a commercial hit, selling underwhelmingly low amounts of units and
not being ranked very highly, but one believes this can be attributed to its
lack of marketing and exposure  (Pooyan).   At the time of its release, it
represented a game that was consistently enjoyable for those who bridged out and
attempted to play it.

                                   References

"Pooyan." The International Arcade Museum,
    www.arcade-museum.com/game_detail.php?game_id=9082. Accessed 28 Sept. 2017.

Martin, Eriq. "What Makes the Perfect Video Game?" IGN, IGN, 26 Feb. 2014,
    www.ign.com/articles/2014/02/26/what-makes-the-perfect-video-game. Accessed
    12 Oct. 2017

"The Three Little Pigs." American Literature,
    americanliterature.com/childrens-stories/the-three-little-pigs. Accessed 29
    Sept. 2017.
